[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
For years now,
we've been told of
an impending crash
in our economic structure.
But here we are, living our
lives as we always have.
Or are we?
Andy Hoffman is with
us today to tell us,
if we look a little bit closer,
it's not all as it appears.
And big changes
still lie in waiting.
And I think that's
what most people want
to know about in this.
Because there's been so much
crying wolf through the years,
when 2008 happened it's
like, surely there's
going to be a major
economic shift.
Well, there was.
But for the average person, if
you're not in tremendous pain,
it doesn't look like
that much happened.
Quantitative easing
started to kind of put
some gum in the holes
for a little while.
And we're going to
get into all that.
So first of all,
what I've noticed
and I continue to notice--
we talked about this a couple
times.
As the years go on, the aisles
in the stores become wider,
and the inventory becomes less
varied and less, in general.
So I'm seeing as a consumer,
when you go places,
there's just less of
everything out there.
So what is that indicating,
because that's in the streets?
>>ANDY HOFFMAN: Well,
essentially, from the way
you started, the people
in charge in Washington
and on Wall Street
and even in the media
will want you to believe
that 2008 was somehow
the end of a bad thing and
that we're in a new beginning.
But actually it was the
beginning of the bad thing.
And as you said, as the
time has passed, yes,
2009-'10 there was all the chaos
and the stock market going back
up and everyone trying to
figure out if things were fixed.
But as time passes,
you look at what's
really going on, not just
here, but throughout the world.
And you realize
that not only was
the sickness something
that's chronic,
but it's getting worse.
And if you talk literally
about the stores,
yes, they're becoming emptier,
because people have less money
to spend.
They have more debt
than they've ever had,
partly because of just a secular
decline in the global economy,
but more so because of all
the money printing that's
been going on for four decades.
The lifespan of this Ponzi
scheme is reaching its end.
And what happens at the
end of a Ponzi scheme?
You try to expand it
even greater, which
is why you're seeing such
incredible disparities
between, for instance,
financial markets and reality
or even economic
statistics and reality.
>>REGINA: Truly.
And just on the
consumer front again,
the companies seem to be
trying every which way to get
$1 from the consumer.
Everything's on sale.
OK, we're extending that
sale another month or a day.
And then it goes
deeper, the next one.
How are companies
staying alive at all?
I don't get it.
How can you have perpetual
40% off sales now,
which use to be a rare
thing-- Black Friday?
Now it's every day practically.
How can you have that and,
as a company, stay alive?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, for
smaller companies,
they're not staying alive.
The job decline rate, or
people going out to business,
is at a high that we
haven't seen in decades,
while the job formation
rate is at a record low.
That's why it's so funny
when the government puts out,
in their monthly
unemployment report,
this thing called the
Birth-Death Model,
which supposedly says, these are
jobs that were created or not
created, that have to do with
companies going out of business
that we don't know about.
But the fact is you can have
a net positive Birth-Death
increase in jobs, because more
companies have been going out
of business than
being started up.
And look, the big companies
are supported by Wall Street.
They're supported by
record low interest
rates that have caused them
to do very, very dumb things,
like borrow money to
buy back their stock.
IBM is a perfect example,
while their core business
is going down.
And then, of course, you have
the big titans-- the Coca
Colas, the Walmarts,
the McDonald's that
are just simply doing badly.
They're doing as
badly as they can do.
I wrote an article, about
three or four months ago,
called "Need or Want,
Demand is Dying."
And the point is that for
companies that sell things
that you need, such as
McDonald's or Walmart,
their business is
doing terrible.
But then you look at
the companies that
are purely discretionary
income, that you
spend with-- Amazon.com,
eBay, perfect examples
of these companies.
Even Netflix recently, their
business is going bad too.
The point is-- it's not just
things that you want to buy.
It's things that
you need as well.
So while Wall Street is
trying to support them,
their core business
keeps getting worse.
>>REGINA: What about beer?
I thought beer
always did well in
extreme financial environments.
>>HOFFMAN: Bear?
>>REGINA: Beer.
>>HOFFMAN: Oh, beer.
>>REGINA: I thought that
was one of those things that
was recession-proof-- beer.
Any news on the beer market?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, I'm not even
sure how beer sales have done.
I don't think they change much.
But the prices are
certainly going down.
And you know, I can tell
you a business which is not
doing well, which
is wine, which is
why you get all these
wine offers now,
all these wine clubs.
Because the wine--
it's just not a world
where people can afford,
the average person,
to spend more than a
small amount on wine.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
On the plane in
here yesterday, I
was sitting next to
a wine distributor,
as a matter of fact, And I
was asking him about that.
And he said, the industry
took such a beating.
But they've just seen an
uptick, just in 2014, and maybe
because he's dealing with
more high-end retailers.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, that's the next
thing that, obviously, we're
going to get to down your list.
The wealth inequality that's
been caused by all this money
printing gets wider each day.
All the money from
2008, or even going
back to the Greenspan
days, has gone
into the hands of Wall Street
and corporate lobbyists, et
cetera.
And more and more, you see the
average person doing poorly,
while the average
1% gets richer.
>>REGINA: And the story
is just deepening.
It's not like it's new.
OK, we're doing this
on election day.
And a lot of times,
an election can
have an effect on the
artificial markets that exist.
But truth be known, in
your opinion, people go
and say, oh, this economy.
Obama has trashed
it, not stopping
to look back to what
he inherited from Bush,
and so on and so on.
So what is your
feeling about the way
the country is
structured politically
and the system we have now?
Does it matter, at
all, whether you
have Democrats or Republicans?
>>HOFFMAN: It's really sad.
When you think
about two years ago,
with the presidential
election, how much-- it
was how important it was.
Will the Senate go to the
Democrats or Republicans?
And it was such a big deal.
And what will happen
in the fiscal cliff?
And holy cow, it's such a
nail-biter to the last minute.
And here we are, two years
later, the average person
is doing far worse.
The country-- the world
And there isn't even a
presidential election
to distract us.
And yet, no one has any
idea who's even running.
No one is talking about, on
the mainstream news-- will
the Democrats lose the Senate?
Maybe today, like
literally, this very morning
there's a couple of races.
But I don't think people care.
I wrote something--
you think back
to what James Carville said,
10 or 15 years ago, when
he was working for Clinton.
He said, it's the
economy, stupid.
That's how you vote.
The economy is doing bad.
George Bush wasn't doing well.
Well, you vote in Clinton.
And I wrote a piece last
year called, "It's not
the Economy, Stupid," because
no longer do people vote
because things are doing bad.
They just go to who promises
the most entitlements.
And at this point, it
doesn't even matter,
because now the
Republicans realize
there are so many poor people
that they can no longer be
the party of the rich.
So they just do whatever
the Democrats do.
Plus, the President
now has so much power
to do whatever he wants.
Remember, just a
year ago, they were
arguing about the fiscal
cliff and the debt ceiling
and this and that.
They don't even argue.
Remember John Boehner.
He was so angry.
Where is he?
They don't even argue.
>>REGINA: Because actually, it
sounds like it's a little too
hopeless, in that sense.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, they're
going to print the money.
They're going to
spend the money.
And that's why they order
the Federal Reserve to keep
interest rates at zero forever.
We have the greatest
debt edifice
in history, the greatest
deficits in history.
All those trends are
only going to get worse.
And therefore, when they talk
about the end of QE, which they
really didn't even end it.
It's comical.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, that's where
we're going next.
By the way, what's happened
since we last spoke?
If you're a consumer, if you
could even qualify for a loan
anymore, what's happened with
interest rates on the housing
market?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, interest
rates, they're not record low,
but they're pretty
close to the record low.
But it's immaterial, at
some point, when something
is so low, whether interest
rate is 3%, 3 and 1/2%, 4%,
it doesn't matter.
The fact is, it's harder than
ever to get a mortgage loan.
But more importantly,
the banks aren't lending.
They just take all
that free money
that they get from
the Fed, and they
park it right back at the Fed
to get free interest rates.
And as far as a home ownership,
mortgage purchase applications
are at a 20-year low.
And in fact, this whole
hype about the housing
boom, the echo
bubble, that we had
in the last couple
of years, it was only
in the high-end markets.
It was only in above
the $1 million houses.
Yes, for a brief
little period of time,
the middle of the market
had a little boost.
But it's really only been
the high end of the market.
Everyone else has seen
their houses go nowhere.
And now the houses-- the
prices are going down.
But more importantly, the
average person is not buying.
The average person isn't
even trying anymore,
because they're saddled
down with all this debt,
with all these student
loans going on.
There's no jobs out there.
The jobs that are there now--
even the government admits,
when they put out their
unemployment reports, that they
hype and say, oh, the
numbers are so good.
You look at the numbers.
They're all part-time jobs.
They're minimum wage jobs.
They don't pay benefits
now because of Obamacare.
The companies are
doing everything they
can to not give you benefits.
The last time I had
company-paid health insurance
was when I worked
on Wall Street.
That was almost 10 years ago.
I call it the mythical
unicorn now, health insurance,
because it's so rare to find a
company that pays it anymore.
>>REGINA: What's
happening with that?
Some article I read recently
was talking about how now we're
going to start seeing steep
rises in the price of health
care under Obamacare.
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
we're going to see
steep rises in the prices of
health care for many reasons.
Mostly, you start with
the money printing.
Then you look at the
demographics, and of course,
the litigious
society that's made
it so expensive to go to
school and to become a doctor.
But Obamacare is
just-- it's socialism.
A, it doesn't work.
And B, it just makes
the costs go higher.
In fact, I think it's pretty
funny that the 2015 price
changes for Obamacare, which
were supposed to come out
last month, were suddenly
delayed until next week,
after the elections.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: But look, my health
care, my health insurance--
and I've been healthy-- has
gone up 15% a year for as long
as I can remember.
And that's before Obamacare.
And again, the thing that
I can't emphasize enough
is, because of the
state of our economy
and our financial
situation, we are clearly
going to be fully socialist.
We have to, or else
everyone starves.
So people need to get
ready for tax rates
like they have in
Europe and Canada.
I mean, it is coming here.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
talk about-- we
started to go there a moment
ago-- quantitative easing.
So we've been through the
first three phases of it.
And supposedly, it was too
have ended last Friday.
What day was that,
maybe the 30th?
People will be seeing this
a little bit in the future.
So that would've been, I
think, October 30 or so, it
was supposed to have ended.
>>HOFFMAN: Did it?
No.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm asking you.
And everyone is
like, what's going
to happen to the stock markets?
Talk about this.
What actually happened?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, first
of all, when you go back
to 2008 and the
emergency response,
I've been in the
markets my whole life.
It was very clear that the--
let's call it the powers
that be.
The Federal Reserve, the
banks, the politicians,
they were taken by surprise.
They didn't realize, even
after what happened in 2000,
they didn't realize
that this could happen.
So everything they did,
they did by the book.
Paulson gets in
front of the Congress
and says, if you don't
sign onto this TARP,
everything is going
to go downhill.
And then when they did sign,
they give exactly $700 billion.
But as the time has
passed, they realized--
why do we have to tell
people what we're doing?
We, the Fed, why
do we have to say,
well, we're spending
$80 billion a month?
We can spend $800
billion a month.
We can spend $20 billion.
>>REGINA: They won't
know the difference.
Just don't tell them.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Is that
what's been going on?
>>HOFFMAN: Yes, of course.
This is what I do for a living,
is seek these things out.
Some of them, in some cases,
the footprints are just huge.
I wrote about last year.
I wrote something called
"Proof of the Tapering Mirage."
And I said, here's
their own footprints.
They were doing $130 billion a
month, not $80 billion a month.
And even today, when
they say QE is over,
their own footprints are showing
that they're still printing
far more than they say.
And they're even
saying, yes, we're
going to reinvest the
interest from Treasury.
So they're still doing it.
>>REGINA: Could
that be why there
hasn't been any kind of stark
reaction from the stock market?
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
the stock market
is now so totally commandeered.
>>REGINA: Yes, so totally.
I laugh at it.
>>HOFFMAN: On a daily basis,
as is the gold market, which
I deal with, obviously,
treasury bonds-- in some cases,
it's covert.
In some cases, it's overt.
The Fed says, we are
buying treasury bonds.
The Bank of Japan says, we
are buying Japanese stocks.
>>REGINA: We're going to
get into that in a bit.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
So the point is, when
someone says to me--
why is the market doing this?
Or why is, let's
say, gold falling?
I say, gold is not falling.
It is being taken down.
The market is not doing this.
It is being moved around.
And in fact, sometimes I
argue that the Fed is actually
doing the opposite of QE.
Because the Fed's
job now, what they've
realized over time as
this crisis has unfolded,
is that their job is not to
save the economy, as they say.
Their job is to save
the financial markets.
And what they say is
simply cater to what
the markets want to hear.
And what they do is simply
cater to making the markets do
what they want it to do.
Now, over time, this-- like
every other effort to do this--
has failed miserably.
And already, you could
see the signs of it.
Look what's happening in
the commodity markets,
in the currency markets,
where you're seeing,
literally, currencies crashing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I was going
to get into that a little bit
later.
But why don't you go into it
now, and some of the nations
that are most vulnerable?
And here we've been hearing that
the US was going to be removed
as the standard for trade.
And the euro was going
to be taking its place
as the global reserve note.
Well, that hasn't happened.
And then you read that the
only reason it hasn't happened
is because the other countries
are in so much worse shape.
Why go after the
dollar at this point?
It's just a relative thing.
The dollar is not theoretically
in good shape at all.
But what's happening elsewhere
that would allow it to maintain
its reserve currency status?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it
certainly won't be Europe,
because I believe
the euro itself is
on the verge of breaking apart.
And it's only been
around for 15 years.
That's what the sad thing is.
Obviously, look, these
are all paper currencies.
They're all trash.
You can even talk about
the Chinese currency.
It's literally pegged
to the US dollar.
It's not a real currency.
When all this is over, when
this Ponzi scheme ends,
it's going to be
the nations that
have the gold, that have
the manufacturing market
share, that are going to be
the leaders in the new economy.
>>REGINA: Well,
there's China for you.
>>HOFFMAN: That's
right-- China, Russia.
>>REGINA: Germany?
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
Germany is probably
going to be toward that
block, because they
have a lot of those things.
But as of right now, it's just
one currency against the other.
It's meaningless.
As reserve currency,
the dollar is
dying-- these deals
that are being
made every day between
China and everyone else, all
the hatred of the United
States because of what we've
done politically
and economically,
mostly because of what the
Federal Reserve has done,
creating this inflation
all over the world.
So look, there's been
plenty of reserve currencies
over time-- the British
pound, the Spanish peseta,
the French franc.
Even Portugal had it.
And Holland, at one time, did.
And in time, the US won't
be the reserve currency.
It'll be a major, major
shock to the standard
of living of Americans,
but it probably
won't happen overnight.
But more importantly,
what Americans will see--
and the whole world will see--
is declining standard of living
and a higher cost of living.
>>REGINA: So which countries
are particularly vulnerable
now in a currency status?
And also, let's get into
the notion of revaluations,
because a lot of
people watching this
are hanging on to their
dong and dinar and whatnot.
But let's talk about it
in a more global sense.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
Well, again, the
biggest thing people
need to realize is that no
matter what currency you're in,
it's backed by nothing.
And what I've been saying
all along is, look,
the United States
has the furthest
to fall because we've been
propped up all these years
by the reserve currency.
But we're going to be
the last to go down,
barring some cataclysmic event,
because we have this market
power from having
the reserve currency.
That's why you're seeing--
yes, the inflation
here and the economic
weakness is bad.
But the rest of the world
needs to keep printing money
to keep up with us.
And when you don't
have reserve currency,
that causes major inflation.
And that's why you're seeing
significant social unrest
in major places.
And we're talking
about Europe right now,
in South America, in
parts of Asia right now,
all because of this
money printing.
And just this little mini crisis
that we've had in this fall,
you've seen record declines of
currencies around the world.
Last time, we talked
about the fragile five,
which is Indonesia,
India, Turkey, South
Africa, and Brazil.
These five currencies,
on average, are down 40%
against the dollar in
the last three years.
And that's since we started all
over QE, our Operation Twist,
our QE3, QE4.
That's when Japan
started its Abenomics,
when the ECB started its LTRO.
So again, it starts
in the emerging--
>>REGINA: So these
countries are suffering?
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
The emerging markets see
the most the fastest.
And we're seeing that right now.
But it is slowly
creeping up the ladder.
You look at what's
going on in Europe.
This is first-world economies.
You look at what's going on
in Japan, the third largest
economy in the world,
and even China,
where this historic real
estate bubble is crashing,
right in front of our eyes.
So there's no real place to
hide from a Fiat Ponzi scheme,
except gold and silver.
>>REGINA: OK.
And other resources, I would
assume, are also on the table.
When you're looking at having
a reserve status, for example,
wouldn't it makes sense if
your country had some kind
of resource to back it?
>>HOFFMAN: It certainly helps.
>>REGINA: And I'm thinking.
Right now, we're looking
at the revaluation
of the Vietnamese dong-- oil--
looking at the revaluation
of the Iraqi dinar-- oil.
Does the fact that these
are backed by commodities
have something to
do with the push
for those particular
revaluations?
And should they be revalued?
We trashed both those nations.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, they're
not, quote, being revalued.
I mean, they are moving, as
they do on a daily basis.
And from the research
that I've done,
there is no currencies
in the world that
have been going up
against the dollar,
not because the
dollar is strong,
but because everyone is fleeing
from all the inflation that's
being exported around the world.
And yes, it's good to have
commodities in your nation.
But again, I wrote a
piece just last week.
It's called, "Collapsing Oil
Prices Portend Unspeakable
Horrors."
>>REGINA: And we're going
to talk about that next.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
For the most part, the
countries that have all that oil
are socialist countries,
which spend all their oil
revenues on the
administration of the state.
So when you see
falling oil prices,
it sounds like
it's a good thing,
but for millions of
people around the world,
it's a very bad thing.
And we're seeing it
already, right now--
this huge drop we've
had in oil prices.
>>REGINA: What happened
in the last two weeks?
Here we are, early November, and
we've seen a decline from say
$3.40 down to $2.80 in
gasoline prices at the pump.
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
the crude oil price
has fallen from $100, $110.
Now, this morning, it
got down to $76 a barrel.
>>REGINA: Why?
>>HOFFMAN: As we
talked about before,
it's the economy, stupid.
It's not just oil.
The media likes to talk
about-- look, oil is down.
That's good.
Well, first of all,
it's never good
when commodities are crashing.
Generally, it's
because demand is weak.
But as I've been
writing forever--
I wrote a piece called
"Commodity Crash"
a few weeks ago.
It's all of the commodities.
You look at the base metals.
You look at iron, cement,
copper, all these things,
they're all falling.
Even some of the food
commodities are falling,
not the ones affected by
these horrible droughts.
>>REGINA: Yet their
prices keep going up.
>>HOFFMAN: But generally
speaking, you're
seeing across the board
declines in commodities
because of economic demand.
And what we're
seeing now with oil
has to do with a lot of things.
One of them, of course, was
this phony shale oil boom.
And again, I spent 10
years on Wall Street
as an energy
analyst, watching all
of the new things
that were going
to create energy independence.
There's this great video showing
every president going back
to Jimmy Carter
and Nixon saying,
we're going to be
energy independent.
And it's always for these
reasons that don't pan out.
And I've seen them all.
The latest is shale oil, which
is extremely heavily depleting.
It's extremely
capital intensive.
And again, it's the
Federal Reserve.
They push rates down to nothing.
Wall Street got all
excited and lent trillions,
or let's call it
hundreds of billions,
to this industry, which is now
heavily indebted, at a time
that oil prices are falling
below the cost of production.
So again, that was another
reason why oil is falling.
>>REGINA: Do you think it's
going to continue falling?
Is there any indication
we're close to bottoming out?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, again, I'm
not in the financial analyst
business.
I'm not here to
make a prediction.
If you ask me what I
think is going to happen--
>>REGINA: I'll just
ask you what you think.
>>HOFFMAN: I believe that
commodities will continue
to fall for a long
time, because there's
massive oversupply that's been
built up by all this money
printing, especially in
China, over the years,
and decline in usage.
You look at just in
the United States,
the retail usage of
gasoline has plummeted.
We're talking about,
for the last 10 years,
it's down-- what is it-- 15%.
It's some very big number.
And part of it is, yes,
there's some telecommuting
and those kind of things.
But generally speaking,
it's because of the economy.
I saw a fantastic graph today
showing a 94% correlation
between retail sales of
gasoline and the labor force
participation rate.
>>REGINA: Of course,
that's interesting.
>>HOFFMAN: Which as you know, is
at a 36-year low-- and not only
that, when we say
36-year low, for men
it's at an all-time low.
Remember, we're
talking about 1978
is the last time
that it was this low,
but that was
because it was right
after the gold
standard was abandoned.
And the prices of
living went up.
And all of a sudden,
all the women
had to go to work to afford--
>>REGINA: And out of college,
the girls are getting the jobs.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
So the point is the actual
labor participation rate, apples
to apples, is all time low.
>>REGINA: I have a
question on that note.
The females are statistically
more highly employable--
not employable, but
more highly sought
after-- upon
graduation from college
right now, from what I've
seen, than the males.
Is that still because there is
a double standard in the wages?
I certainly see this all around.
Women arent-- there's
no equality yet.
>>HOFFMAN: This isn't
my field of expertise.
And I wasn't aware of that.
I can give you a little
anecdote from my China
world, since you
know that I adopted
from China two years ago.
It's long been
known that males are
sought over females over there.
And that's why they would always
give up the female children
for adoption.
But that's completely
changed now.
>>REGINA: Yes, because the
boys are left with no girls.
>>HOFFMAN: One, because
of demographics,
but also because they said
that the culture is changed
to the point where females
are more desirable to have
around the household.
They're more prudent with money.
They don't feel as empowered.
So there's a lot of changes
going on in the world.
If that happens in America,
I wouldn't be surprised
if somehow they think
they can pay them less,
even though it's harder
to do that these days.
But again, very few people are
sought after out of college
these days.
We're talking about-- this
is the highest student
debt you've ever had
and also the lowest jobs
coming out of college.
I think I just read that the
average 25-year-old right now
has $20,000 of
student loan debt.
I mean, $20,000 is a lot of
money to try to pay back.
>>REGINA: Yes,
especially if you're
making a substandard
wage when you graduate.
I'm going to pick up on
something from a moment ago.
I made a little note to myself.
You were talking about how
none of these currencies
have any kind of serious
commodities backing and such.
And I was thinking, but
what about the rinminbi
or the yuan, the Chinese yuan.
They've been, from
what I understand,
storehousing gold for
quite a long time,
massive amounts of gold.
Is it a gold-backed
currency, the rinminbi?
>>HOFFMAN: Well again, it's
no different than saying,
is the Iraqi dinar
backed by oil.
No, it's not.
Just because there is
oil in the country,
it certainly is a
positive economic force
to have resources.
It would, generally
speaking, help your nation
to do better economically and
make your currency worth more.
But the currency is not
itself backed by anything.
>>REGINA: But what about
the acquisition of gold
by the Chinese?
Is their currency
linked to gold?
Is it the gold backed?
>>HOFFMAN: No, the currency
is not linked at all.
In fact, the Chinese currency
is one of the most paper
currencies you're going
to find, because it's
linked dollar for dollar, or
yuan to yuan with the dollar.
So they've pegged
it, just like-- we'll
get to that-- the Swiss have
pegged the franc to the euro.
They've pegged the
yuan to the dollar.
So they have had massive
inflation over the years.
And it's also caused
these dramatic distortions
of the global
manufacturing industry,
that we allowed it to happen.
>>REGINA: Sure.
Well, ok, I'm confused.
>>HOFFMAN: The fact that
they have gold, by the way--
>>REGINA: But they
have a lot of it.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Why don't they
tie it to their currency?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, first of
all, they have far more gold
than they say they have.
And someday, we'll
know how much that is.
And yes, one day they will.
But the fact is, the last thing
that they want to do-- it's
a very delicate balance.
There's a status
quo going on here.
And it's a status
quo, by the way,
for the Chinese
politicians as well.
Because once that genie
is out of the bottle,
you're going to see
economic earthquakes spread
around the world.
And the current
Chinese politicians
won't survive that either.
They would like to
quietly acquire and hope
that the end game doesn't
occur on their watch.
But ultimately, as I said,
when these paper currencies
finally are dead and buried,
as they always will be--
>>REGINA: They'll
be standing strong.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
In the new order,
those who have things
of value, which would be, for
instance, gold or manufacturing
market share or
resources, are the ones
that are going to be the
leaders of the new world.
And we have none
of those things.
>>REGINA: No.
Let's go to the Swiss now.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
Well look, my world
is gold, as you know.
I work for a bullion dealer.
My life, my blog is
talking about the impact
of all these factors
on gold and silver
and why should own it to
protect savings over time.
Now, the Swiss, as everyone
knows, generally speaking,
are money masters.
For such a small
country of, I think,
8 million people,
over the years,
they've created this broad power
in the financial world because
of their smarts.
Now, for many, many
years, the Swiss franc
was actually backed by gold.
In fact, they were
the last currency
to be implicitly backed
by gold, back in-- I
think it was 2000 or 1999.
>>REGINA: When did
end, around 2000?
>>HOFFMAN: 1999.
That's when all
good things ended.
So the powers that be
in Switzerland somehow
snuck into their
constitution that they
didn't have to do that anymore.
And they joined all
the Western powers--
the United States and England.
And they sold most
of their gold.
And the coup de
grace was in 2011,
when they pegged the
Swiss franc to the euro,
because the Swiss franc was
going up so much during all
these crises that
they said, no, we
want to get more manufacturing
market shares, so we're
going to destroy the franc.
And again, this is
just political talk.
It ultimately hurts the country.
And if you look at
their balance sheet,
it looks just like the Fed's,
exploding money printing
over the last three years,
simply to maintain that peg.
And if you look
at the euro, it's
at the lowest level
it's been in years.
So it's been a
complete disaster.
>>REGINA: What's it at right
now, say, pegged to the dollar?
>>HOFFMAN: To the
dollar, it's 1.25.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
That's low.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, so the point
is, even the average Swiss
knows they can look-- especially
with this referendum coming
up-- and see.
Well, we did this
horrible experiment.
First of all, 15 years
ago, we sold our gold
at like $500 an ounce.
Second of all, we've pegged our
currency to this horrible dying
euro, which has only fallen.
And it's cost our
country trillions
or-- I don't even know
what the number-- hundreds
of billions worth
of printed money
that's gone down the drain.
And the economy of Europe is
worse than it's ever been.
And Switzerland is
certainly no better off.
Switzerland just
had a referendum
to raise their minimum wage to,
I think, it was $27 an hour,
because the cost of living
has gotten so high there
because of what they're doing.
So meanwhile, here we are.
You know that they're a direct
democracy in Switzerland.
They're the last remaining
direct democracy,
where if you get
enough signatures,
you can actually have the
people vote to change the law.
And lo and behold, a
referendum is around
that's going to be voted on
November 30, whether they
should de-link the
franc from the euro
and relink it to
gold, which would
require them to buy something
like $80 billion worth of gold.
It's a big deal.
And of course, the
whole world would
see this validation of gold
for what it really is-- money.
So it's a very, very big vote.
And right now, you're seeing
major, major propaganda
going against it,
trying to prevent
what could be a life-changing
event for a lot of the world.
>>REGINA: What was
the real reason
that the governments
of the US-- and I
assume other governments as
well-- started cracking down
on Swiss bank accounts and
started causing some turbulence
in their own banking system?
What was the real
reason for that?
And if they are
backed by gold again,
do you think there's going to
be a resurgence of Swiss banking
among the global wealth.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, if
they vote yes, it's
so funny how even
the average Swiss has
no idea what a positive
development this would be.
And again, there are going to
be shockwaves around the world
from a lot of things.
For instance, if
they do vote yes,
there's going be a lot of chaos
in the financial world, which
will impact everyone.
>>REGINA: Tell about the ripple
effects and how that works.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
Well again, you're going
to see a loss of confidence
in paper currencies.
As gold is validated,
you're going
to see a rush into physical
metal, where there's
very little of it out there.
And it could cause
this kind of fear
out, that something is wrong.
It would be a major thing.
But the thing is, I don't
think the Swiss realize
what a positive it would be
for them, if this happens.
Because yes, people will want to
put their money in Switzerland,
because they'll trust
the one currency that's
backed by something.
And this is what the powers
that be around the world
are so scared of.
>>REGINA: What about all
those foreign accounts,
where people were locked
out of their accounts?
What actually happened?
>>HOFFMAN: Why did we do that?
>>REGINA: It was supposedly
dirty money or whatever.
>>HOFFMAN: You know, it's
not dirty money though.
It's just insanity.
It's one of these
things where you
see we're at the height--
we're at the peak of an empire.
We passed the peak.
But when you see
an empire like ours
start to go downhill and make
these cataclysmic decisions,
it's like saying, why are
we trying to provoke Russia.
Why are we trying to
bomb everywhere we can?
Why we alienating
everyone we can?
>>REGINA: Why did we try
to tick off Switzerland?
>>HOFFMAN: The simplest example
would be-- we need tax money.
So if we just go attack
them, we know that there's
money that should be our due.
But what they wind up doing
is, they alienate Europe.
They alienate everyone.
There are these
new laws this that
just came out, these FATCA,
Foreign Account Compliance,
where basically, the US
government is telling
foreign banks around the
world-- if you don't tell us
what every dollar that
Americans are putting in,
we're going to find you.
We're going to lock
you out of our systems.
So what they're
doing is, they're
all getting rid of
American customers.
It's no different
than Obamacare.
They're saying, if you
don't comply with Obamacare,
you're going to jail.
So they say, OK.
Well, we'll just make
everyone a part time worker,
so we don't have to
comply with Obamacare.
It's the exact same thing.
>>REGINA: So on that note,
where are the people--
the extraordinarily
wealthy in America--
hiding their money
now then, if you
can't go to the foreign
and off-shore banks?
>>HOFFMAN: If you're the
extraordinarily wealthy,
you can always lobby your
way into getting breaks.
But to me, some of it is going
to go into gold inevitably.
And some of it is going to go--
there are some very complex tax
shelters.
But the government is breaking
them down, one by one.
And that's why I'm saying,
more and more people
are going to realize-- you have
few choices, very few choices.
One of them is going
to be gold and silver.
And any other place you
go around the world,
you never know.
>>REGINA: Well now,
aren't there are a number
of states in the US
that are accepting it
as a unit of exchange?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, yeah.
>>REGINA: You hear about this.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, I think-- what
was the state, because now I've
already forgotten-- Utah.
It makes sense.
Mormons are smart.
But the reason that
they're doing it
is not because they're so--
>>REGINA: It's such
an insignificant--
>>HOFFMAN: They just
want the gold and silver.
They want to see if
anyone is dumb enough
to pay their taxes in
gold, instead of dollars.
Because otherwise, it will have
no impact on-- they're saying,
well, you can exchange it.
And we'll give you dollars.
And there's no taxes
if you exchange it.
But what they want is someone
dumb enough to do that.
So the United States government,
or even the Utah government,
is not going to end
this game on their own.
It's going to be forced upon
them by the financial markets.
>>REGINA: Right.
Just a moment,
going back again, I
don't know if you would
have this information.
But because this is
such a big issue,
this issue in Switzerland,
this referendum,
have you heard anything about
the lobbying, the players
involved in campaigning?
I would think this would
be a really hot campaign
in Switzerland.
>>HOFFMAN: Oh, absolutely.
What are you hearing about that?
What are the
arguments, both sides?
>>HOFFMAN: Well look,
there are two sides.
The one side, the anti side
is the Swiss National Bank,
in other words, their
Federal Reserve.
They desperately want
to maintain power.
And it's so pathetic, because
the arguments-- they don't even
make lucid arguments.
They say, if we have this,
it will reduce our power.
And the people are
thinking-- yeah,
but this is why
we proposed this,
because your power has caused
you to do dumb things like sell
gold at $500 and peg the
Swiss franc to the euro
and cause all this
record inflation, which
makes us have to vote on
minimum wage of $27 an hour.
So they don't even
have good arguments.
The argument is we want
to keep the status quo.
That's it.
And all the other things
they say are ridiculous.
But they are very powerful.
For instance, there's a
guy named Igan Von Greyerz.
He's a very, very well known
money manager in Switzerland,
very pro-gold.
And he's kind of become the de
facto leader of this movement.
And he had this
Paypal account set up,
where people from around the
world can contribute to it,
so they can put up more
billboards and publicity.
And somehow, it just got frozen.
I mean, these are the kind
of things that they do.
They go to Paypal
and say, you are not
going to accept
people's money for this.
So that's that.
And you'll see.
Within Switzerland though,
how much can you possibly do?
They give speeches, with
giving pretty pathetic excuses.
And then the pro-gold
give speeches
giving very viable excuses.
And it really comes down
to what the people believe.
Because you can always
make people believe
that with gold-- you'll
say, well, with gold,
it's going to restrict
our ability to grow.
And it's going to restrict
our ability to give you
handouts-- you know, wink wink.
So we'll see what people do.
And you're seeing right now--
some of the massive market
manipulation of the last
month is related to this.
>>REGINA: The prices of gold
and silver have crashed.
>>HOFFMAN: Can you imagine?
>>REGINA: And so it's crashed
just as we supposedly ended QE3
and just as the election is
happening-- boom, a big slide.
What's that about?
Why?
Why would whoever
is manipulating
it do that at this
particular time?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's
the US government.
We say, who's manipulating it?
Yeah, they have partners.
They work with the big banks,
the too big to fail banks.
And the Federal Reserve, as we
said, as Alan Greenspan just
admitted, that they're
not independent
of the federal government--
it's the government.
The US has the most to
lose, the US government.
And they also have
the best tools.
They have the best financial
weapons of mass destruction.
They have the best
derivatives, the best
high-frequency algorithms.
They have all these
things that they can do.
And yes.
Look, this is not
only the biggest time
of year for physical gold
buying around the world.
And believe me, we've seen it.
There's been absolutely
record demand.
2013 was a record year for
both physical gold and silver
demand.
2014 is already on
a pace to beat that.
And October is your
busiest time of year.
>>REGINA: And it's crashing.
>>HOFFMAN: So you've
had the FORMIC
decision, with the
whole QE, which
is kind very disingenuous.
But more importantly, the
ECB just started their QE.
The Bank of Japan just
announced this crazy QE.
So it's not like money
printing has ended.
>>REGINA: And yet,
last week, Bernanke
said that it was an
absolute, utter failure.
>>HOFFMAN: No,
Greenspan said that.
>>REGINA: Greenspan said it.
I though it was Bernanke.
Or was it Greenspan?
>>HOFFMAN: No, Bernanke
has been out of the office
not long enough.
Greenspan is doing
it because he's
trying to whitewash his legacy.
>>REGINA: The Council on
Foreign Relations chat--
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, he
said it didn't work.
It's not working.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes, Greenspan
to me and people
who understand
about him-- he was
one of the true gold advocates.
He wrote a piece in 1966 called
"Golden Economic Freedom."
His mentor was Ayn
Rand, of all people,
literally the most pro-gold
person in the world.
But he sold his soul
for power in Washington,
as all politicians do,
as Ben Bernanke did,
as Janet Yellen did.
And now, to me, he's
more responsible
than any single person on the
planet for what is happening
right now-- Alan Greenspan.
And so in his old age, he's
trying to subtly whitewash
his legacy and say, yeah--
>>REGINA: He was very clear.
It's a failure, QE, the
whole Quantitative Easing
program is a failure
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, he did it
in a very different way.
And the Ponzi scheme was at
a far less advanced stage
when he did it.
So it didn't have the
same near-term impact
as it's having now.
So he didn't have to do it
the way they're doing it now.
So he could say, oh, yeah,
I wouldn't have done QE.
Well of course you would
have, if you were there now.
But you did other things.
You lowered interest
rates to nothing right
after 1987, right
after 2000, 2001.
He did all the same things.
And it's just that--
again, we were talking
before about the
economy is so bad,
but people don't look at what
Obama inherited from Bush--
yeah, and what Bush
inherited from Clinton
and what Clinton inherited from
Reagan and Bush and et cetera.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOFFMAN: It's a Ponzi
scheme that grows larger.
And all Greenspan is doing
is simply trying to whitewash
his legacy, throw in things
about you should own gold.
Because one day, it'll
break this cartel.
It will be astronomical.
And I'll say, see,
I said to do it.
And look what I said in 1966.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: But again,
the more important thing
was that he admitted that
the Fed was not independent,
which is what I've
been saying all along.
>>REGINA: Right.
So there are a couple
things going on here
that-- we're going to talk
GDP, which we have done before.
And you have a very
different explanation
than we would normally see
through the mainstream media.
So I'm just going
from some stats
now, because this is one of rays
of sunshine coming through, is
the GDP.
So the first quarter of 2014
was supposedly 2.1% growth,
followed by the
second quarter doubled
to 4.6% and an average of, thus
far, about 3.5% for the year.
That would
theoretically, according
to the reports I've read,
mean the best performance
in the GDP for 10 years.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, that would
be true, except it's not
an increase of 2.1%.
It was a decrease of 2.1%
in the first quarter.
So let's start right there.
Remember, the
first quarter, they
blamed that negative GDP on
the weather, which is comical,
because I did all
kinds of work showing
that the weather actually
was no different on average
than the weather has been
in any first quarter.
And actually, if you look at
the real numbers, the problem--
it's not that there were
more flight cancellations.
It's that there's less flights,
because there's less business
travel.
There's less passenger
travel going on right now.
So again, we started the first
year, that was the excuse.
It was the weather.
The second quarter,
they said, it was 4.5%.
But in my blog
every day-- I write
every day-- I was showing
how all the real numbers were
completely dead-on flat.
Whether it's the durable
goods, factory orders,
industrial production,
you name it.
Everything was flat
with the first quarter.
And yet, they come out
and say, it was 4.5%.
And then, of course,
the third quarter
here, it was boosted by
almost an entire percent
by government defense spending,
mostly for bombing ISIS.
I'm serious.
And then they hype, and
they say this is good.
No, it's not good.
They printed money,
created new debt,
so that we could bomb people,
kill them, and create enemies
that don't produce anything.
And then people forget
that a year ago--
All these numbers, by the
way, are apples to oranges,
because of the way they
changed the calculation of GDP.
>>REGINA: And that's what
I wanted you to explain,
because you did once before.
But for whoever didn't
see the last interview,
it's important to know
what GDP really is.
>>HOFFMAN: GDP, first of
all, is as arbitrary a number
as you're going to get.
Just to the average
person, does anyone really
believe you can measure the
output of a nation of 300
million people, precisely
to the point percent?
A lot of these numbers,
first of all, are estimated.
The same goes with the
unemployment reports,
all these things-- estimated.
And they're using the seasonal
adjustments, which are always
positive, and becoming
more positive to make
things look better.
And then, of course,
the GDP is actually
what they put out
as real GDP, which
means the nominal number less
an arbitrary inflation number.
And right now, they're using
1% as their inflation number,
when we know that the
average cost of living
is going up closer to 5% to 10%.
So on a real basis, it's
been negative all along.
It's very, very
negative right now,
as are real interest rates,
because the real inflation
rate is so much higher
than people say.
But also, they've changed the
calculations of GDP, not just
here, but everywhere in
the last year or two,
to make it look bigger.
Here, we've added royalties.
We've added goodwill.
We've added research and
development that doesn't
actually produce anything.
In Italy and France they've
added prostitution and drug
dealing, just to make it
look bigger and to say,
it's bigger than it was before.
So again, between GDP,
inflation, and unemployment
or employment, these
are three of the most
rigged of all the data.
And like I said, when you
look at the real data--
industrial production,
retail sales,
durable goods, factory
orders, which again,
also difficult to measure.
But they're real numbers.
All of those are screaming
recession, as are,
if you look real, for instance,
the labor participation rate.
The real employment rate,
the under-employment rate,
that number is as bad
as it's been, here
and around the world,
in our lifetimes.
>>REGINA: It's just
so bizarre that we're
living in this, essentially,
totally artificial construct,
that our lives are
so deeply pinned to.
Yet, everything we're
being told is false.
All the numbers we're
being told are false.
This is very difficult for human
beings to navigate through.
Talk about cognitive dissonance.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, the thing is
that-- again, two years ago,
a perfect example is that the
Senate and the House elections,
people still, in some way,
believed that it mattered.
In fact, I have some friends
who are really into Fox News,
for instance.
I don't even hear them
ever talk about it anymore.
I don't think people
really care anymore.
They're so focused on
the difficulty of getting
by on a day-to-day basis.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: I say,
the Fox-- people who
are into that kind
of thing, they
wanted to believe that all
the problem was-- if we just
got Republicans in
power, it would change.
But now they're realizing
that it's nothing
to do with who's in power.
They're all the same right now.
So from a Wall
Street perspective,
yeah, there's
cognitive dissonance.
They've got to justify
to their investors
why they'd be investing
in stocks at all time
high valuations above $2,000
with the worst economy.
But for the average
person, they just
look at-- if they're
even looking anymore.
I mean, you look at the ratings
for the mainstream news.
They're plummeting.
If they're even looking anymore,
they're going, GDP is up.
Really?
>>REGINA: Employment is up.
>>HOFFMAN: Employment is up.
>>REGINA: The market is up.
>>HOFFMAN: It's like we were
talking before this interview
about.
I went to Best Buy this weekend,
both Saturday and Sunday,
because they screwed up
my order on Saturday.
There was no one there.
I remember, a couple years ago,
you couldn't get a salesman
to help you on a Saturday.
>>REGINA: Very true.
>>HOFFMAN: And it was like
that Saturday and Sunday.
So again, the
cognitive dissonance--
I've said for a long time
now, all the powers that
be, as I call them, have left
are propaganda, money printing,
and market manipulation.
But the propaganda is
not working anymore,
because no one believes anymore
that the economy is great.
>>REGINA: Mostly they don't
But still, I see this.
I think the younger
generation, because they really
grew up in the midst of this,
the people in their 20s,
for example, and younger,
for them, the fact
that there aren't enough jobs--
>>HOFFMAN: Well, they know
full well, absolutely.
>>REGINA: They know full
well what's going on.
They're finding
their ways around it
or dropping out
and smoking weed.
They're doing what they
have to do to contend
with a bad situation.
But for those who've
been in the market
a while, in the
game for a while,
in general-- in
life for a while--
this is really
damaging to the psyche.
Because you hear this,
and you read this.
And if you watch mainstream
news, for example,
it's reinforced every day.
Wow, god, things are great.
What's wrong with me?
How come I can't
seem to make it work?
How come I'm in debt?
How come my kid
can't find a job?
And you take it
personally, as though it's
your personal failure
as a human being.
>>HOFFMAN: And
also, the messages
are so mixed,
because believe me--
and this is what I'm
looking at all day long.
The mainstream media is not
all saying, things are great.
And part of it is because they
realize they need ratings.
>>REGINA: So someone
has to vary the message,
just to get some market back.
>>HOFFMAN: You can't just say
all the time, things are great.
For instance, I look at
Yahoo Finance every day
to see what their top story is.
And one day-- for instance,
I saw two articles today
or in the last two days.
One said stocks are rising
because oil prices falling.
And one said stocks falling
because oil price is falling.
And I'm going,
well, which is it?
And I see this all the time.
And one day, it'll
say, "Employment
is doing better than ever."
And the next day,
the headline will be,
"Employment has
never been worse."
So again, there's a lot
of confusion out there
that's being caused
by these mixed
messages of the rigged markets,
of the rigged economic data,
of what people see
in the real world.
And yeah, we're talking
about open minds here.
People are trying to figure
how to navigate through this.
And the fact is, the best
ways to just focus on reality
and not focus what
people who have agendas
are telling you what reality is.
>>REGINA: Focus on what
you're seeing in the streets.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
And make your adjustments in
life based on what you see
and what you feel, not
what they tell you.
But again, from a
financial situation,
most people don't have
the means anymore.
I'm thinking about what
I'm doing in my household
right now.
We're going to get smaller cars.
We're looking at-- is this
gym cheaper than this gym?
We just got rid of
Comcast and got DirecTV,
because it's cheaper.
And I mean, that's
what people are doing.
>>REGINA: Everywhere.
And when you hear people
at gatherings-- although,
I live in Sedona.
We talk about slightly
different things.
But every now and
then, I'll be somewhere
with real people that talk about
things that you would expect.
And you don't hear the talk of
the '90s and early 2000s at all
anymore at these events.
>>HOFFMAN: Or even 2007.
>>REGINA: Or even 2007--
it's people strategizing.
I think I'm going
to sell this off.
I think we're-- like you
said, consolidate this.
There is none of that big talk
about portfolios that I hear.
But maybe I don't
travel in elite circles.
That's for sure.
>>HOFFMAN: Retail participation
in the stock market
is as low as it's
been in our lifetime.
So again, yes, some
people still have 401(k).
Of course, the 1% have
their big stock portfolios.
But people just aren't
invested in stocks anymore.
And they're certainly not
invested in houses anymore,
because they all
lost their houses.
And we have record low
mortgage purchase applications,
record low first-time
buyers, that kind of thing.
So again, yes, the world is, for
everyone but the top tier, who
have benefited from all
this money printing,
the world is changing
for the worse.
And you see it across the board.
And I focus more in
the economic side.
But as you said, you see
it around wherever you are.
A lot of people
don't want to say it.
They don't say casually--
if you don't know someone,
they're not going to say,
yeah, things are bad.
But you see what
people are doing.
When Walmart is
saying that our sales
projections are going to be
a lot lower than we said.
This is Walmart.
And you know what one of the
reasons that they gave was?
Because the government cut
down on food stamps programs.
And it's funny, because they
don't cut down on anything.
But they actually did reduce
the food stamps program.
More people, but--
>>REGINA: And Walmart would
be particularly affected.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes, yes.
And then, of course,
the other thing
that hurts these companies is
the strong dollar, ironically.
And that's why all these
currencies are in a race
to debase their
currencies, because when
you have a strong
currency, you become less
internationally competitive.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: And so
that's another reason
why the government will never
allow interest rates to rise.
>>REGINA: OK, one more stat
here I wanted to toss out.
This has to do with the notion
that the deficit under Obama
has dropped.
Is that correct?
What are we talking
about here when
we're talking about deficits?
Before, it used to be in a
couple of billion dollars.
Now, I know even know how many.
I've lost track, in real
terms, of how many trillions
of dollars it is.
First, how much is it?
And has it truly fallen at all?
>>HOFFMAN: No.
This comes up when you
talk about footprints.
This is a Sasquatch-sized
footprint,
for Obama or anyone to
have the gall to say
that the deficit has fallen.
He said that last
year-- we just finished
September, 2014 fiscal
year-- that the deficit was
down to like $580 billion.
They were proud of
that-- $580 billion.
>>REGINA: $580 billion, yes.
>>HOFFMAN: The problem is,
the national debt went up
$1.1 trillion, or
twice that amount.
So he says that
our deficit was X,
but they actually borrowed
twice that deficit.
And then the simple
matter is, they've simply
changed the accounting.
They call things
off balance sheet.
So half of the things that
they're spending money
on-- printing money
and spending on--
are things that they just
simply say don't matter.
That's just like saying the CPI
doesn't include food or energy,
because they're going up.
Or a lot of these budgets--
wars don't count in the budget.
So when they come out and
say, our budget for this year
is $5 trillion dollars.
Oh, but that doesn't
account for the wars.
The wars are not official.
And that's exactly what they do.
The budget deficit is
as bad as it's been.
And it's going to get worse.
Because now, the economy
is getting weaker.
We're going to have less
tax revenues, of course.
The only two, quote,
businesses in this country that
were doing well were
this echo housing bubble,
which is now falling
apart, and of course,
shale oil drilling, which is
on the verge of collapsing.
So again, anything that
they've said was a lie.
And anything going forward
is going to be worse.
And then you look at where
the global economy is.
The global economy,
they're not bashful.
They're telling us
Europe is in recession.
Japan is in recession-- a lot
of South America, a lot of Asia.
They're saying, we
are in recession.
Things are getting worse.
That's why the commodity prices
are falling around the world.
>>REGINA: You mentioned
that some of the foods
were falling in prices.
Which ones specifically?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, I see,
even the price of rice
has come down some.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: And that's the
major staple of the world.
Of course, the things
that are impacted
by these horrific
California and Brazil
droughts, which are
only getting worse
and could be catastrophic--
>>REGINA: Yeah, what can
you tell us about that,
in terms of any--
>>HOFFMAN: Well, from
what I'm reading-- again,
I try to focus on
a lot of things.
Everyone could see that the
California drought is getting
worse, anyone in America.
You see the numbers.
You see the pictures.
It's getting worse.
>>REGINA: Yeah, they
have a huge bond measure
up for like $60 billion today--
I imagine it'll probably
be passed-- for more water
innovations, technologies,
and so forth.
>>HOFFMAN: That's right.
Print the money or borrow
the money to get it.
But again, we're
talking about a third
to a half of the
produce in this country
and a lot of the things
people don't realize,
like milk, that come
out of California.
And that's why the prices of a
lot of things cannot go down.
But then people don't
realize that there's
an equally bad drought going
on in Brazil, where you have--
it's the biggest cattle
exporter-- soybeans,
coffee, sugar cane.
Yeah.
And in fact, I read last week
that the city of Sao Paulo, 20
million people, they said,
by the middle of November,
they're going to
be out of water.
There's 20 million people there.
So I don't know how
bad that can be.
But the fact is, there are
certainly some foods that
are going nowhere but up.
But generally speaking,
even some foods
are being impacted by the
fact that people are spending
less money around the world.
>>REGINA: OK.
So we've talked
about this before,
but I think it's always
important to remember
that there has to
be a silver lining
of some kind to everything.
And we've already talked
about gold and silver
and taking refuge
in commodities that
have genuine value and such.
>>HOFFMAN: Right,
silver lining, correct.
>>REGINA: Silver lining, yes.
So aside from taking
whatever anyone
has left by way of
investment monies
and putting them
there, again, what
are some of the more
appropriate, practical things
we can do for ourselves which
now as we can see and go along.
Because I've been bringing
this up for seven years--
we're seeing there's a
real mental shift that
has to start occurring.
Because the way we
once lived, I don't
see that returning-- the
way we were living, even
prior to 2007-- anytime soon.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
Well, I focus, obviously,
on the financial side of it.
And I understand what
we're trying to do here.
And I try to put
that in my mind.
The best thing that
people could do
is just to reduce expectations
if they haven't already
been reduced.
Unless you're in that
a elite 1% that's
lucky enough to have benefited
from all these horrible things
going on, you've been
sobered up a bit,
whether it's by market losses,
the labor force, or just
generally things that
you deal with in life.
I've brought my
expectations down
of where I once
thought they could be,
and it's very liberating.
It's liberating to think
that I'm thinking now,
for the first time, of
actually getting a smaller car
when my lease runs out, for
the first time I've ever had.
And I think, well, why do I have
to keep getting a bigger car?
Who cares?
So that's one way
of looking at it.
I, of course, focus more on
preparing people financially.
But to not worry so much
and think that whole mindset
of the 1990s America or
even that uber bubble
in the 2000s in real estate,
that that's the way the world,
because it's not the
way the world is.
It's not the way the
world is living now.
And it's not the way the
world has ever lived.
We've had this very, very
privileged 30 or 40 or 50 years
here in the United
States, where we
were taught to believe
that we are invincible.
But we're not.
And once you accept that
and act accordingly,
it makes life a lot
more liberating.
>>REGINA: I totally agree with
you, because the beauty of life
is really in our
relationships with each other.
It's in the simple things.
It's about friendship
and spending time
together and cooking together.
And to me, those are the things
that give me the greatest joy.
It's not going on an
inexpensive vacation.
So if we can just kind
of learn to herd together
a little bit more again, I
think we can ride it out.
And I wanted to ask you.
I don't think I
asked you last time,
what did you think of
the movie "Wall Street"
with Leonardo DiCaprio?
>>HOFFMAN: Oh, the
"Wolf of Wall Street?"
>>REGINA: "Wolf of Wall Street."
What did you think of that?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's funny,
because that company--
what was the name of it?
Stratton Oakmont, I
used to deal with them.
I was on Wall Street
for many years.
And when the big
IPO boom, before
this current ridiculous
Alibaba tight one,
was back in the 1990s.
And Stratton Oakmont was
one of many small firms
that we dealt with.
I had no idea at the time that
they were this crazy scheme.
I think the movie was horrible.
>>REGINA: Oh, god, it was
so decadent and awful.
But what about-- for
those who haven't seen it,
even just to stay the
first few minutes--
>>HOFFMAN: Well.
It's entertaining.
>>REGINA: Well, to listen
to the monologue by Matthew
McConnaughey about what
the stock market is and how
it's run--
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Number one rule of
Wall Street-- nobody,
I don't care if
you're Warren Buffett
or if you're Jimmy Buffett.
Nobody knows if
the stock is going
to go up, down, sideways
or in circles, least
of all stockbrokers.
>>All right.
>>It's all a fugazi.
You know what a fugazi is?
>>No, fugazi.
It's uh fake.
>>Yeah, fugazi, fugazi,
it's a wazi, it's a woozi.
It's fairy dust.
It doesn't exist.
It's never landed.
It is no matter.
It's not on the elemental chart.
It's not real.
>>Right.
>>Right?
Stay with me.
>>Uh-huh.
>>We don't create.
We don't build anything.
So if you've got a client
who bought stock at a $8.
And it now sits at $16.
And he's all happy.
He wants to cash in, liquidate,
take his money and run home.
You don't let him do
that, because that
would make it real.
>>Right.
>>No.
What you do?
You get another brilliant
idea, a special idea,
another situation, another
stock to reinvest his earnings
and then some.
And he will, every single
time, because they're addicted.
I mean, you just keep doing
this again and again and again.
Meanwhile, he thinks
he's getting rich,
which he is-- on paper.
But you and me,
the brokers, we're
taking home cold, hard cash,
via commission mother--
>>Right.
>>[WHISTLE]
>>That's incredible, sir.
I can't tell you
how excited I am.
>>You should be.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
Well, but again, that was a
different-- let's call it evil
stock market.
I mean, there were
different frauds.
When I left-- I left
Wall Street in 2005.
And the big reason that I left--
I was at Solomon Smith Barney.
And before that, I was
with the buy-side firms
or the hedge funds.
But a lot of the
reason I left was
because of all the abuses
I saw, mostly abuses
that were conflict of interest.
I was in research, and I saw
so many conflicts of interest,
it made it very difficult.
And yeah, there were penny
stock scams and all that.
But generally speaking,
it was bull market.
Today, the jobs that I
did, they don't exist.
There's always a couple of
token analysts out there
that get on TV.
But the game on
Wall Street now is
all about taking free money from
the Federal Reserve, insider
trading, high-frequency
trading, and those kind
of things, that have nothing to
do with the abuses of the past.
And now they have
derivatives and all kinds
of other unethical
and/or illegal--
>>REGINA: And
sophisticated algorithms.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, of milking
the world for what it's worth,
that it's hard for me even
to compare those days,
where it was just kind
of a bunch of bad eggs,
to today, where the whole
industry is cancerous.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And on that note,
there's so much
more of the ramifications of
all of this down the road.
The trickle down
effects are going
to be huge on young families
that are having children now
and the potential
for their children
to go to college, all of that.
All these things are going
to start shifting around
the topics in this
conversations.
>>HOFFMAN: And here's one
thing I can advise to people.
Stop thinking your kids
need to go to college.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
I totally agree.
>>HOFFMAN: No one can afford it.
They don't get you any jobs.
It's a waste of time.
Do what people have
done throughout history.
You learn a trade.
>>REGINA: I agree.
I totally agree.
Well, on that note,
thank you, Andy.
It's always a pleasure
to kind of catch up.
It might not be
heartening necessarily,
but it's always a
pleasure to hear
a kind of a straight shooter.
>>HOFFMAN: Thank you.
I hope I have some heartening
news in the future years.
But right now, I'm
not so optimistic.
>>REGINA: Thanks, Andy.
I'm on overload, total overload.
But I think we all need to
take at least a look at what's
going on around us so we can
use our energy and our resources
wisely from here on out.
As before, you can
stay up on Andy's blog
by going to milesfranklin.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.